# Grammar Words

## Interrogatives

ngesha 

ngä (ngë ngä ngë ngï ngai ngä) what, basic open ended interrogative word.

ngësha (ngësho ngësha ngëshe ngëshi ngëshai ngësha) who

ngëhai  when

ngïde where

ngëli how

ngïpa why

ngëla (ngëla ngëlan ngëlas ngëlal ngëla) which, referring to this/that.

ngëses how many

ngëse how much

# Postpositions (Particles)

Particles line up with 3 scopes: noun, verb, and clause. 

Verb particles take one full noun phrase marked to the particular case. These particles are highly specific, and there are many (similar to English with its above, under, within, amongst, etc.), compared to Spanish or Japanese (with a use of a location noun + particle, like の上に、の前に、etc.) This leads to a low amount of overlap in the meanings and uses of each particle. 

### tan

Location/time postposition, equivalent to *en* in Spanish. Denotes where or when something happened.

### dau

The direction/destination of something, equivalent to *a* in Spanish. It can also be used for explicit daitive marking.

### puna

Origin (from). Also used to mean purpose to mean because. Often difficult to contrast with but important distinction with pa, it means the cause of something to happen.

### pa

Destination (to). Also used to mean reason as in “in order to.” Distinguished from puna as like the end goal and why steps were made to reach that goal.

### yun

### su

The plausible conditional. See [Contitional Statements](Concepts%20f6091311666046b5bb58389031afe841/Conditional%20Statements%208f889a783ec04917b63b89c2d909d50d.md).

### kwota

frequency

### sutpik

### kära

Duration 

### weno

above, up

### deshi

below, down

# Coordination

Meriteji has a wide number of options for combining words into operant sets, although the options for (nouns and Jentie), (Atnate and verbs), and clauses are distinct and use different processes.

## Noun and Jentie coordination

These use conjunctions that agree with the case of the nouns involved (and Genitive, of course, for Jentie.) They can be place with other of two patterns—one after each noun, or just one between the penultimate and ultimate nouns. Options are plentiful, and meanings are precise, meaning that often these words must be described with length in English.

**ke** exclusive or, meaning any of the options but not more than one. 

**u** exhaustive and, meaning all of the options, and that it is a complete list.

**ko** exhaustive and/or, meaning any of the options and at least one, possibly all, and that it is a complete list.

**wi** illustrative (non-exhaustive) list, meaning list of potential options, but that there may be others not mentioned explicitly

**__nai, gya __:** not __, but instead _, meaning creaing contrast against at least one false value and then giving the true one.

**nau** negative exhaustive, meaning none of the listed nouns/Jentie in a negative clause.

**nwi** negative illustrative, meaning giving examples of what is not in a negative clause. nwi is usually restricted to formal or legal language, and in more colloquial speech speakers will use wi or nau instead.

---

**-ni** can be added to **ke** and **ko** to form **keni** and **koni**, adding the nuance of possibility of none at all. When this is used, it counts as the final item in a list, and the penult-ult pattern must be used. 

## Atnate coordination

Atnate do not change form to combine, and so they also have no way of marking complex coordination. To combine, simply place the adjectives directly together. A chain of atnate must be placed together—when a noun is described by Jentie and Atnate, the atnate must be grouped together, closed to the noun directly.

## Verb coordination

This coordination refers to multiple verbs within the same clause. There are three joiners: sequential, non-sequential exhaustive, and non-sequential illustrative. When joining verbs, the last verb listed takes the main clause conjugation while the others take a coordinate form, agreeing in tense.

| Sequential | -ye | -we | -re | -le |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Past | -yen | -wen | -ren | -len |
| Present | -yek | -wek | -rek | -lek |
| Future | -yeba | -weba | -reba | -leba |

| Non-sequential
exhaustive | -ye | -we | -re | -le |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Past | -yeten | -weten | -reten | -leten |
| Present | -yete | -wete | -rete | -lete |
| Future | -yeteba | -weteba | -reteba | -leteba |

| Non-sequential
illustrative | -ye | -we | -re | -le |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Past | -yegan | -wegan | -regan | -legan |
| Present | -yega | -wega | -rega | -lega |
| Future | -yegaba | -wegaba | -regaba | -legaba |

## Clause Coordination

This section does not describe subordinating clauses. Those are simply the infinitive plus conjunctive postposition. 

**ade** - and, meaning cumulative non-contrasting clauses together

**nade** - nor, meaning cumulative non-contrasting clauses together where both are negative. It replaces the negative nai at the end of the first clause.

**taya** - but, meaning contrastive clauses where the second clause contradicts the first.

**tekä** - yet, meaning strong contrastive clauses indicating frustration or defiance of expectation.

**niya** - not __, but rather __, meaning contrastive where the first is negative and the second is giving a true alternative

## Examples

The shirts come in blue, red, and white, or you could get all three.

(lit.) Shirts can be blue, red, and (+none) white, but you can also buy all three ones.

shatë labeinne, rakë, u hikel da le pli taya, dan tol sai da pulche pli.